okay let's go straight to Downing Street
the Prime Minister about to address the
brief good afternoon welcome everyone
again to this number-10 press conference
where I'm joined by Professor Chris
witty chief medical officer and sir
patrick valance our chief scientific
advisor i'm sorry not to have been part
of this trio for so long i want to thank
everybody who's been doing such a good
job in my absence and i want to thank
the NHS for so much including getting me
back here and I might add very much
happier hospital visit yesterday in a
few minutes I'm going to hand over to
Patrick and to update you on the
epidemic but first I'm going to set out
today's latest data 900 1905 tests for
coronavirus have now been carried out in
the UK including 80 1611 tests yesterday
one hundred and seventy one thousand two
hundred and fifty-three people have
tested positive that's an increase of
six thousand and thirty two cases since
yesterday fifteen thousand and forty
three people are currently in hospital
with coronavirus compared to fifteen
thousand three hundred and fifty-nine
people yesterday and sadly of those
tested positive for coronavirus across
all settings twenty-six thousand seven
hundred eleven have now died that's an
increase of 674 fatalities since
yesterday across all settings this
figure of course include includes deaths
are not just in hospitals across this
country
therefore families every day are
continuing to lose loved ones before
their time we grieve for them and with
them
but as we grieve we are strengthened in
our resolve to defeat this virus to get
this whole country back to health back
on its feet and were determined urgently
and in particular to overcome those
challenges that in the last few weeks
have been so naughty and so infuriating
I'm not going to minimize the logistical
problems we have faced in getting the
right protective gear to the right
people at the right time both in the NHS
and in care homes all the frustrations
that we've experienced in expanding the
numbers of tests but what I can tell you
is that everyone responsible for
tackling these problems whether in
government or the the NHS or public
health England local authorities we are
throwing everything at it heart and soul
night and day to get it right and we
will get it right and we're making huge
progress and I will not under 8 their
work and the achievement of those who
are dealing with global shortages in a
global pandemic they are rising to a
challenge we have never seen in our
lifetimes and the same can be said of
the entire people of this country
staying in enforced confinement not
seeing family not seeing friends or
grandchildren worrying about their jobs
and the future and so my message to
everyone again today is your effort and
your sacrifice is working and has been
proved to work today
the number of kovat hospital missions is
falling the number of patients in ICU is
falling we've so far succeeded in the
first and most important task we set
ourselves as a nation to avoid the
tragedy that engulfed other parts of the
world because at no stage has our NHS
been overwhelmed no patient went without
a ventilator
no patient was deprived of intensive
care we have five of the seven projected
Nightingale wards and it's thanks to
that massive collective effort to shield
the NHS that we avoided an
uncontrollable and catastrophic epidemic
where the reasonable worst case scenario
was five hundred thousand deaths and so
I can confirm today that for the first
time we are past the peak of this
disease well past the peak and we are on
the downward slope and we have so many
reasons to be hopeful for the long term
the UK is leading international efforts
to find a vaccine today
Oxford University is announced a
partnership with Astra Zeneca to develop
what they believe could soon be a means
of inoculating ourselves against this
disease but until this day comes and I'm
afraid we cannot say exactly when it may
be we're gonna have to beat this disease
by our growing resolve and ingenuity so
I will be setting out a comprehensive
plan next week to explain how we can get
our economy moving one how we can get
our children back to school back into
child care second and third how we can
travel to work and how we can make life
in the workplace safer and in short how
we can continue to suppress the disease
and at the same time restart the economy
a huge amount of work has been going on
on that plan and of course as we produce
it we are being guided by the science
and we will try to build the maximum
political consensus as we produce it
across all parties
and across the UK but there will be five
key tests that we must satisfy before we
can put that plan into action we must be
sure that we can continue to protect the
NHS and its ability to cope number two
we must see a sustained fall in deaths
three we must be sure that the infection
rate is falling for we've got to
overcome the operational and logistical
challenges on testing and PPE fifth and
this is the most important we must all
make sure that the measures we take do
not risk a second spike that would
overwhelm the NHS we've come through the
peak or rather we've come under what
could have been a vast peak as though
we've been going through some huge
Alpine tonne and we can now see the
sunlight and the the pasture ahead of us
and so it is vital that we do not now
lose control and run slap into a second
and even bigger mountain and so to avoid
that disaster our fifth and final test
is that nothing as I say we do should
lift the are or the reproduction rate of
that disease back above one and before I
here before I hand over to Patrick I'm
going to ask for a short explanatory
clip about the one and before we come to
that clip let me just emphasize keeping
the are down is going to be absolutely
vital to our recovery keeping the
reproduction rate of the disease down
and we can only do it by our collective
discipline and working together I
we can do it because we did it we've
shown we can do it in phase one of this
this country came together in a way few
of us have seen in our lifetimes to
protect the NHS and to save lives and
that's why I'm absolutely convinced we
can do it in Phase two as well can we
play the video now the government has
set out five tests that must be met
before we begin to adjust social
distancing measures one of the most
important tests is the rate of infection
we have to make sure this is decreasing
all virus is like normal flu have a rate
of infection scientists call this ah-ah
is the average number of people one
infected person passes a virus arching
to beat coronavirus we need to keep our
as low as we possibly can imagine a
hundred people are all infected if our
is more than one then those hundred
people will infect more than a hundred
people and in turn they will infect even
more the virus is spreading quickly if R
is less than one those hundred people
will in fact a fewer than 100 people and
in turn they will infect even fewer the
rate of infection is slowing down and
coming under control scientists around
the world have been tracking the r of
corona virus since the start of the
outbreak in March at its peak R was
around 3 which seems to be the natural
rate for this valorous since then thanks
to you and the social distancing
measures you followed we've been able to
reduce R and it is now below 1
but we've only just passed the peak of
the virus and it's vital our stays below
over the coming weeks and months the
government will be monitoring our very
carefully it will be a key factor in how
social distancing measures are used in
the future good well I hope that was
clear and youthful Patrick any update
please I think you can have the first
slide please
so as the Prime Minister has said there
are five tests that the government has
laid down for adjusting the lockdown and
what I'd like to do is just go through
some of the data in terms of the
epidemic and so show you where we are
next slide please
so the R is below one we think it's
between point six and point nine across
the nation maybe a little lower in some
places a little higher in others but
it's below one across the country this
shows the number of new cases but as
I've said before this only really shows
in the blue the case is in hospital and
then in the orange the cases have been
tested outside so it's not the total
number of cases we know that the total
number of cases is on its way down you
can see in the blue bars here that the
number in hospital you can see is coming
down and of course the orange bars
represent others who've been tested
including essential workers but the
number of infections will be coming down
next slide please
this turns into a reduction in hospital
admissions for kovat and this is the NHS
data so this is England only data but
what you can see here in the blue is
inpatients newly diagnosed with kovat
and in the orange is new in patients
with confirmed kovat at the time of
admissions so these are new admissions
into hospital and you can see very
clearly from the 20th of March there was
a rise up to a peak somewhere at the
beginning of April and now it's come
down so the number of cases is coming
down hospital admissions are coming down
next slide please
and that of course translates into the
number of people in hospital with kovat
and this shows the data across across
the the nation's and in different
regions you can see very clearly the
decrease in the number of
people in hospital in London you can see
a slightly flatter situation in some
other places we need to make sure and to
stick with what we're doing in order to
get the are down further to continue to
keep it down and to make sure that the
number of people in hospital comes down
right the way across the nation but you
can see the trend here to decrease that
in turn leads the question of how do you
get the critical care beds down and
again when you look right the way across
England Northern Ireland Wales and
Scotland the number of patients in
critical care and those on ventilators
is coming down right the way across it's
coming down slowly as you would expect
but it's on its way down next slide
please
and that in turn starts the lead to the
decrease in deaths and here you can see
the number of deaths in all settings so
this isn't just hospital this is across
all settings and you can see it's
gradually beginning to come down it's
not coming down as fast as it went up
and I've said before I expect there to
be a bit of a plateau stage here before
things really come down further but you
can see it's on its way down final slide
please and again this is the comparison
it's difficult to actually look at
exactly what this means because people
record things differently but the
message is are is down the number of new
cases is down that's turning into fewer
admissions fewer people in hospital
fewer people in intensive care and we're
beginning to see that decrease in deaths
thank you
thanks very much Patrick well we're
going to go first to members of the
public who got some questions to ask us
I'd like to hear from Michelle in
Cornwall we are getting inquiries daily
to book a holiday neck from June onwards
we're worried there'll be an influx of
people coming away from the cities into
the tourist hotspots which could bring a
second way to areas such as Cornwall
please can we ask how tourism within the
UK will be managed in the coming weeks
well thanks Michelle and first of all I
want to I sympathize very much with
everybody in the tourism industry
who's taken such a such a hit and it's
been one of our jobs to make sure that
we look after business as far as we
possibly can through our our loans our
support schemes to our furthering
schemes for for workers you will come
back Michelle we are going to make sure
that the UK bounces back as strongly and
as fast as we possibly can but we've got
to be sensible I think the public have
been very sensible so far in in staying
away as as far as they in obeying the
advice it's it's vital as I say that
that does not fray and we don't see
people starting to disregard what we're
saying but we will be saying as I say as
I say a lot more next week and in the
coming weeks about how and when we
propose to unlock the various parts of
the UK economy what you're going to get
next week is really a roadmap a menu of
options the dates and times of each
individual measure will be very much
driven by where we are in the epidemic
what the data is is really saying it and
we're getting in a lot more data every
day now in the course of the next in the
next few days so Michelle the the short
answer is you're dead right we've got to
get your business going again we've got
to get tourism going again but we can't
allow and such a big influx of tourists
as to create a second spike a second
wave of the of the disease principle or
Patrick is there anything that you want
to add to that okay I hope that's okay
Michelle thank you very much for your
question Katie from Liverpool well Katie
asks the lockdown have seen an increase
in suicide and what help is available
people experiencing a mental health
crisis and clearly this is a major issue
that we've been thinking about people
confined
home can become more prone to existing
mental health conditions and so that's
why it's very important to understand
taking the pressure off the NHS in the
way that we have means that we can now
as as Matt Hancock said I think on on
Monday we can now make sure the NHS is
once again prioritizing other urgent
care needs across the community
including people's mental health needs
and public health England is doing a
huge campaign to reach out to people who
have mental health needs who are feeling
in need of comfort in what is a very
very difficult time if you if you if
you're experiencing yourself at home
then there are there are lines that you
can call go on our website got you care
put in money now into mental health care
charities across the country to support
what we agreed I agree very strongly
with Katie from Liverpool is an issue
that needs to be addressed and goes to
show why it's all the more urgent for us
now to begin to come out of lockdown but
to continue to suppress the disease so
they don't anything to add to that is if
you go on to the NHS website there are
contact details both for NHS things that
are available for people who have mental
health issues or are feeling feeling
lonely or indeed in this case suicidal
there are also many remarkable voluntary
organisations well ones that are well
known like the Samaritans but there are
others as well and I would strongly
encourage anybody who is feeling they
haven't they're going into a mental
health crisis or feeling suicidal or
very very low mood please do look up
those numbers and go to one that's
relevant to your particular needs and
call someone because there are a lot of
people out there who would be very keen
to help you that's absolutely right that
goes ready for anybody who is
start by the current situation people
who you know whether the atmosphere at
home has has gone wrong people who are
feel at risk of domestic abuse in
particular there are help lines for you
it's absolutely vital the people should
should use them and as I say in one of
the reasons why we don't want us there
there are good practical health reasons
why we don't want to protract this
lockdown
any longer than it needs to be
protracted okay let's go to the media
could we go to Laura Coons Berg from the
BBC
thank you very much Prime Minister
there's been such huge suffering they've
been 26,000 deaths since you last stood
at that lectern there's been huge
suffering people's health but also to
the countries well so many people are
very very worried about making ends meet
by continuing with lockdown are you
telling the public that the economy just
has to wait and if I could ask Sir
Patrick or professor Witte you say the R
is now between point six and point nine
what level does the R need to be at
before you would be comfortable with
starting to ease the restrictions thanks
very much
Nora and of you know what you say is of
course totally right and we we we
mourned for every every life lost and we
mourned for the economic damage as well
that the country is sustaining in four
people's the dreams of people's that
they're seeing shattered in their in
their businesses their anxieties about
their their jobs i we totally understand
that as you know government has made a
huge effort to look after workers to
protect them with our furloughing
scheme colossal sums in loans are going
out of the door we're doing everything
we can and i think i really pay tribute
to richie soon ack the the chancellor
for the speed with which he's come
forward with the schemes that that he
has i do think that the UK has done very
well by comparison with with a lot of
places around the world but it's it's
absolute vital nor that if we're to a
bounce back as strongly as i think we
can
that we don't have a second bout of this
every second bad spike because that
would really do the economic damage and
that's why we've gotten lasting economic
damage and that's why we've got to
calibrate our measures so carefully and
make sure that we not only unlock the
economy gradually but also find ways of
continuing to suppress the disease and
possibly new ways and more ingenious
ways of suppressing the disease as well
that's what we're working on now and
you'll be seeing a lot more of that I
hope next week Chris and then Patrick so
there isn't a perfect answer to what
should the R be except we are absolutely
confident that the wrong answer is
anything over one because as soon as R
goes above 1 then you restart
exponential growth it may be slow if
it's just above 1 it may be a lot faster
if it goes a lot above one but
exponential growth restarts and sooner
or later and the higher it is the sooner
it is the NHS will go back to the risk
of being overwhelmed and the numbers of
cases will take out up it is also
important though from a health point of
view to emphasize to one other thing
which is though I've talked before about
the fact you have the direct deaths from
coronavirus but also indirect deaths
part of which is caused by the NHS and
public health services not being able to
do what they normally can to look after
people with other conditions and it is
therefore important that whatever point
we're at that the NHS not only has the
are below one or at or below one at all
times preferably significantly below in
an ideal world but that's certainly
below but also that it has Headroom
which allows it to operate not just in
doing the emergency things which it is
managed to maintain throughout the
entire coronavirus first phase but also
to do the other important things like
urgent cancer care elective surgery and
the other things like screening in
public health preventive terms which we
need to do to keep people healthy so
this is those two things from my from my
perspective as someone who's responsible
for talking about health and thinking
about health there's a chief medical
officer absolutely those two to me seem
critical I completely agree with that
and I think it's worth just thinking at
the beginning of this we talked about
the doubling time of the epidemic we're
now talking because the are is below one
at the harvick time of the epidemic and
we want to keep it going down so it has
to be below one and then we need to get
the numbers down to a level which is
manageable and gives us some Headroom in
order to be able to make changes thanks
very much Laura can we go to Robert
Peston of ITV oh good afternoon
gentlemen and good to have you back
prime minister and you made the
important point that we've avoided the
reasonable worth case of 500,000 deaths
but by our own chart the death toll in
the UK is possibly the worst in Europe
certainly amongst the worst in Europe as
we head into the second phase what
lessons have you learned from that
seemingly worrying outcome and secondly
um because of the unprecedented help you
are giving to struggling individuals and
struggling businesses the national debt
is rising by hundreds of billions of
pounds a record amount in in peacetime
Prime Minister how greater risk is there
that when we are through this crisis you
will feel compelled to cut public
services and move us back into a new era
of austerity ok well first of all Robert
on the UK's international comparison I
think it's very very important that
people should understand that the
collating of data internationally is is
you know the devilled with with with
difficulties and comparisons are very
very difficult and actually I think that
the the
real test any real comparator is getting
the comparison is going to be possible
at the end of the of the epidemic when
you look at total excess deaths
I'll ask Chris or Patrick to say a bit
about that and so the I genuinely think
when I look back at what the UK has has
done I think that and by the way when we
when we put in the lock down it was
earlier in the curve of our epidemic
than it was relatively speaking in in
France Italy and and Spain you know I
think we did the right measures at the
at the right time and don't forget that
you know people are talking about the
difficulties of locked honest and very
good questions about mental health
suicides
it's a it's a very very demanding thing
to ask a population to do very tough and
so I think it was completely right to
make our period of lockdown a coincide
as far as we possibly could with the
peak of the epidemic that peak as I said
just now has has passed I do think that
broadly speaking and we're learning
lessons every day Robert well any
lessons every day but I do think that
broadly speaking we did the right thing
at at the right time and you know just
you know since you make international
comparisons let me remind you that at
the time we had to take those very
difficult decisions we were looking at a
situation in which it seemed all too
plausible that people would not get
ventilated beds in the way that was
happening in other countries and it
seemed really possible that people would
not have access to intensive care as we
were seeing happening tragically in some
other places around the world and
together this country really did come
together to protect the the NHS to to
enforce to obey the social distancing
rules and and to save lives so overall
you know I'm not gonna pretend that were
not lesson learning lessons every day of
course we're learning lessons every day
but those are the those of
conclusions that that I draw and on on
the international data wait and see and
I wait and see till to the end of the
epidemic on your second big picture
question I which is an entirely
legitimate one well you know what what
my instincts are Robert I think the
economy will bounce back strongly I
think that this government will want to
encourage that bounced back in all kinds
of ways but I've never particularly
liked the the term that you that you
just used to describe government
economic policy in it certainly not be
part of our approach austerity by the
way was the term you just use for
viewers you've forgotten what Robert
said I'm sorry
Christmas country when I come from a
profession as Patrick does we're
learning the lessons after you've got
we've gone through something is
absolutely critical totally accept the
basic premise of your question which is
we must learn lessons at the right point
but what you don't do frankly is do that
in the middle of something we are no
where near the end of this epidemic we
are through and it is very good as the
prime minister said we're through the
first phase of this there is a very long
way to run for every country in the
world on this and I think let's not go
charging in to who's won and who's lost
at this point let's actually try and
take it quite you know quite carefully
learning lessons from one another as we
go along but if you want to see how this
actually is difficult to do technically
there's an excellent article in today's
Guardian by Professor David Spiegel
halter yes which is actually lays out
why comparing koba deaths as you see on
the graphs he's very very difficult to
do and should be done with extreme
caution I've said repeatedly and I will
say again the metric we should be using
when we do get to the point this is the
right thing to do which is definitely
not yet is all cause mortality adjusted
for age that is the key metric we
discussed it today amongst a lot of the
scientists everybody agrees this is the
key metric and the reason for that is
every country measures its covert cases
in a slightly different ways they're
comparing it with them to one another is
largely a fruitless exercise but there
are comparisons to make and there are
certain
technical things all the time we can
learn from other countries and to be
clear other countries can learn from us
for example the ability to get people
into trials at the moment is something
where the UK is taking a very leading
role so I think lessons go in every
direction but I think let's do the post
action review which we absolutely must
at the right moment and we are
definitely not at that stage yet sadly
thank you so much thanks Robert
dan wouldn't talk radio experts believe
there is a ticking cancer time bomb as a
result of this crisis our professor
Carroll Sakura and a group of leading
oncologists predict that 60 thousand
extra cancer patients could die as a
result of a lack of treatment and a lack
of diagnosis so professor whiskey first
have you done any similar modeling and
if so can you give us an idea of what
those numbers look like and Prime
Minister as we move into the second
phase of the lockdown can you guarantee
that anyone who needs life-saving cancer
treatment will be able to get it well we
looked at actually across the board so
throughout this what I've said is there
are four ways in which people will
suffer
ill health and die as a result of this
epidemic directly from kovat which we've
been talking about indirectly because
the NHS is overwhelmed which as the
Prime Minister has said is one of the
things that we've managed to avoid so
far and are determined to continue to
avoid but the third group is all the
things which under normal circumstances
health and preventative service would be
doing but which it is not able to
efforts apart for the NHS and public
health have had to be reoriented
and then finally the the impacts of
increasing deprivation now in that third
group which is the one you're talking
about it's not just cancers actually
we're very concerned for example that
there has been a fall away in people
coming to accident emergencies to
emergency hospital hospital things with
things like strokes and heart attacks
they must be going on and one of the
worries we have is that people are
thinking well I can't go to the NHS
because it can't deal with these
emergencies it definitely can
but you are absolutely correct that what
we are very determined to do is to make
sure that as much of normal
non-emergency services for the NHS and
public health are switched on in a
responsible way where we can do it with
with in as phased way to ensure that the
period where actually there has been a
delay is minimized and to prioritize the
things that are the most urgent first
and then other things which are as
important but a less urgent
we kind of do slightly later in the
system and a lot of thought from my NHS
and public health colleagues is going
into how you get that phasing back on
again right
yeah well Dan you're asking an
incredibly important question because I
think one of the things we become
increasingly concerned about as as we've
seen the decline in in corona in Kovach
cases in the in the NHS particularly in
intensive care and elsewhere is is you
know is are we seeing an unnatural
displacement our people who frankly
reluctant scared to go to hospital when
they should be going to hospital is very
important if if people have urgent
conditions and need treatment they
should that they should go to to a
hospital and I can certainly say that
when it comes to urgent cancer care Dan
people will get the treatment that they
need and let's be absolutely clear about
that can we go now to Frances Elliot of
The Times a little banister and you've
made the our rate of the kind of guiding
star of your policy going forward but
you can only say that it's somewhere
between point six and point nine
that's quite a wide range of uncertainty
there and I press again on what is a
manageable our rate going forward and
what are manageable numbers professor
Allen's talked about and secondly you've
also talked about that you'll you'll
give some guidance to safer workplaces
next week can we and and transport can
we expect some clarity on face masks
please yes okay both both points look
thanks Francis very much on on the are
and you know I'm
I'm going to sort of give my Lehman's a
kind of it I hope that Kristen and
Patrick may may want to rather to you
know correct me or or or explain file on
the are at the moment there are
different hours in in in different
environments and the crucial thing is to
stop the overall national are from going
over one again because as Chris has and
Patrick have explained that's the moment
you get the risk of another exponential
curve upwards I think that the change
now in where we are is that we're
starting to get much more and much
better data about where things are and
that will that will continue to improve
so that as we go forward with our plan
for for phase two will be much more
sophisticated in the way that we're able
to respond to what we think may be
changes in the our weather locally or
regionally or indeed nationally I hope
you understand what I'm what I'm saying
but I think the people need to
understand that driving down they are is
of course our collective endeavor and
the better we can do it locally
nationally and across the country
the faster we will be out of it and on
your second excellent point which was
about masks and and face coverings I
think what and again are defer to to
Chris and Patrick but what I think sage
is saying and what I certainly agree
with is that as part of coming out of
the lockdown I I do think that face
coverings will be useful both for
epidemiological reasons but also for
giving people confidence that they can
go back to work and you're going to be
hearing more about that and that kind of
thing I next week I do with the are at
the moment we're using a calculated are
looking at all sorts of things including
contacts looking at genomics looking at
data from ambulance hospital admissions
and so on to calculate the are
and it's right but it's got a range it
would be forcefully precise to say we
know exactly what it is and different
models give slightly different rates and
as the Prime Minister has said it's not
exactly uniform across the country in
London it's probably somewhere between
0.5 and 0.71 we're doing now which is a
really important part of this going
forward is actually measuring the are by
measuring the number of active
infections in a random population survey
that's going on this week it'll go on
next weekly go on the week after so we
start to get a measured value of our and
that together will start to help us
refine exactly where the r is and it's
always the case in an epidemic you get
closer and closer to a precision value
it's never going to be absolutely
precise but we will narrow it down and
it'll be more of a measured r which i
think is an important important point ok
good thank you thanks very much thanks
thanks Francis Richard Vaughan of the
IEEE Francis's question really giving
you have a better idea of how many
people are actually infected what figure
do you think you need to get to in order
for test and trace to be effective and
Prime Minister if I may
you've obviously contracted Kovac 19
yourself and needed serious hospital
treatment has it changed your approach
to tackling the crisis at all ok well
I'm good thanks very much Richard I mean
on on how far you need to get the new
cases down the are done to to be able to
do as new cases is the key variable
there I I think probably I'll ask the
scientist to answer on that christen and
battery you can do things like track and
trace at any stage of the epidemic but
it has a greater effect and a higher
proportion of the heavy load can be
taken by it if you're doing it a much
lower level of numbers of cases a day
that I think is broadly the answer I
mean putting exact numbers on that there
is no really precise way of doing that
but this is one of the things that
modelling groups that
saij and others have looked at in a lot
of detail and indeed Patrick and I were
discussing this with a lot of teams
earlier on today because we need to look
at the range of possibilities but to be
clear there isn't a magic number but in
broad terms the lower the number the
more effective it'll be as an
intervention Thanks
yes so Richard on your on your question
about my own case look I mean I was I
was very very lucky I had wonderful care
as I as I said wonderful treatment and
let's let's be frank
tragically thousands of people have been
less fortunate than I was and that's why
you know the objective of this
government is to save lives across the
country to minimize to minimize the
suffering that this epidemic is causing
and is going to cause and that's been
our objective frankly from the beginning
it's unchanged it will continue to be
our objective thanks very much
Richard can we go to Alex Wickham of
BuzzFeed the NHS has stayed under
capacity which is obviously a good thing
but given the number of spare ICU beds
available during the peak why is the
UK's death rate so high particularly in
care homes and for the experts in the US
laughs i Antony who falsely said that
the antiviral drug renders there had a
clear-cut effect on reducing recovery
time and was proof that drugs could
block the virus the PM just now
mentioned some other way to remove yawns
and manage this later on do you to share
that confidence about Brenda's area and
it's the UK working on curing this drug
for Britain's Alex I think I'm on your
first question I'm really going to if
you know I think there are all sorts of
discussions about all sorts of factors
comorbidities and so on that increase
the risks of coronavirus in this or that
country is a huge debate already opening
up I think really what I'm going to do
is sort of defer to the answer that
Chris gave earlier about the vital
importance of waiting to the end before
making these international comparisons
and and just looking at the the total
excess mortality and and and and trying
to draw some some lessons and some some
conclusions there because at the moment
I just think that the data is is not
he's not clear but on the other point I
on REM severe I defer to speak to that
so REM des aveer is a drug that was made
for Ebola and has been tried for Co vide
it absolutely does hit a particular part
of the virus that's been shown actually
there are some structures of proteins
from the virus which you can show the
drug binding to and there are two big
studies that have reported out one from
China and one from the US the one from
China was a bit smaller it didn't show
any overall benefit in terms of outcome
and it was stopped early partly because
the number of cases were decreasing the
one in the US which is a bigger study
showed a benefit in terms of the time to
recovery so damn dry out for days it
didn't have a statistically significant
effect on death although it looked like
there were fewer deaths so well there
were fewer deaths in that group but it
wasn't sustained if accan so I think the
answer is this is a really promising
first step in other words it shows that
if you got a drug that you know binds to
a bit of the virus and inhibits it you
can actually get some effect and that
effect isn't very large at the moment it
could get bigger as more studies are
done there are other studies going on at
the moment of the UK has been part of
those studies but it's a very promising
first start it's definitely not a magic
bullet to cure this but it does show
that drugs are going to be possible to
have an effect on this virus and
therefore there'll be more that come
along and ultimately it may need to be a
combination of drugs that comes together
to make this really effective
which obviously agree with the first
thing is and this is the cautious
medical scientist in me that you should
always wait until you've seen the
published paper there's pain have been
peer-reviewed in a journal before
jumping to conclusions so we've had a
very encouraging verbal report of this I
think let's see the data before we over
interpret where we are but you know
clearly encouraging first step and the
second thing just building on Patrick's
point is I think people often imagine
that you move suddenly from a situation
where you have no treatment or no
vaccine particularly all this is true
for treatment to you suddenly have the
treatment actually what tends to happen
is by incremental steps you move forward
things steadily improving sometimes
combinations of drugs start or each one
of which has a small effect but he put
them together the the additive effect is
very considerable so I should think we
should see this as an encouraging
provided it holds up on the publication
first step along a long path and any
better treatments in the future than we
have today and my final point is I'd
really like to thank those in the UK who
are taking part in clinical trials
because the way that you actually learn
about drugs and for the future helped to
improve treatment for others that is for
these trials to go on and we have trials
in the UK are recruiting at an
absolutely extraordinary rate due to
people volunteering yes it is going to
be possible to do something there'll be
more work to be done to get more drugs
out on this thanks very much our Alex
and can we go finally to to Joe Byrne
from the Stoke Sentinel hi good
afternoon prime minister gentlemen can
you hear me yes well okay
still conference key workers are being
told they must drive an 80 mile round
trip to Manchester Airport for
coronavirus tests many workers who need
to test don't drive or have access to
transport there is a testing facility at
Stoke city's bet365 Stadium but it's
only for emergency workers and the NHS
will the prime minister make more
testing available for essential workers
in stoke-on-trent and
willda bet365 testing expanded to
include all key workers and their
families and for Chris and sir Patrick I
think you just touched on this but given
that 600 patients at Royal Stone
University Hospital are undertaking drug
treatment trials to combat the virus how
vital of a role our Royal Stoke patients
playing in reducing the overall number
of deaths through these trials well
thank you very much Joan first of all
thanks to all key workers in in state
thanks to the entire people at stake for
what they're doing to help us
collectively to to get this virus down
get it under control to pass the peak in
the way that we have done today thank
you for bringing to my attention at this
point about the 18 mile round trip for
testing we'll bring it up immediately
I'll check it out immediately with with
the NHS and with the huge team that we
now have responsible for testing you're
going to be hearing a lot more in the
course of the next couple of days as you
can imagine about where we are with
testing you heard me say earlier on
today that we've got the numbers up to I
think 8086 thousand plus but there is
clearly a massive way to go in principle
every key worker in this country should
be able to get a test and we want that
to happen we are where were massively
ramping up testing and I think I'm right
in saying though I know that Matt
Hancock
will undoubtedly be telling you more
about this tomorrow I think I'm right in
saying that we're now doing you know
about as much testing as any other
country in Europe if you look at the
more more recent figures I know what
we're supposed to deprecate these
international comparisons but we have
massively ramped up our testing
operation we're going to wrap it up even
further and on your on your specific
point a Joe about making sure that our
key workers in Stoke get the tests they
need on time without having to do an 18
mile round trip the best I can tell you
is that well
be on to it and we'll come up with a way
to ensure that they get the tests they
need without going through that kind of
that kind of blog so I want to wrap up
this this session it really
extraordinary that so many people in
stoke and indeed many other cities
around the UK but absolutely in Stoke
have volunteered for this and I just
like to say a huge thank you yeah on
behalf of future patients who are going
to actually benefit from the fact that
people have volunteered to do this and
that means we will learn as Patrick says
we're as new drugs come through as old
drugs are tested against this and we
will be able to treat this better and
that will be down to people who in Stoke
and elsewhere who are taking part in
these trials so enormous Thanks
I it's incredibly but it's the only way
we can find out what works it's really
generous of people to volunteer for this
and it makes a massive difference
because otherwise the world's full of
anecdote and what this does is allow you
to really understand what works and what
doesn't so please think thank you thank
you very much everybody and see you all
again course next few days thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC dovecote UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News